---
layout: post
title: "THE PERFECTION PARADOX"
date: 2025-12-26
---

THE PERFECTION PARADOX

What is perfection? Can one truly reduce it to one state? Over years philosophers have pondered and yet still no consensus. That’s the beauty in the thinking. All we can agree often we can find magic in perfection, often we call it the highest form of anything.  I believe perfection lies in perception However often classically defined as an immaculate state, - flawless and devoid of defect.  The classical definition often reducing it to a standard or a norm, quite a flawed trained of thought and all things contrary, discarded as imperfection.  How can we think of perfection so imperfectly?
Though what if I said to you, they are one if not the same. There is perfection in imperfection and often our perception of perfect is quite imperfect, an oxymoron it sounds but quite true and it’s what sets this paradox alight. Everyone fighting to be right, I think perfection is limited when seen only in one light. One can simply look at art, Da Vinci or more vividly Picasso’s cubism revolution turning away from classical art standards turning what once was considered imperfect perfect. There was beauty in the difference and one would argue would it ever stand out if he were like the others, probably not but if perfection is limited to a standard, wouldn’t that mean perfection couldn’t be outstanding however because to deviate from a standard is already quite an imperfection. Personally, that’s not a thought to which I would like to subscribe. 
I would like to think there’s fantasy and beauty to perfection, if it were set to a standard, it would simply rob it of this and make it nothing more than to fit the average. Something solely attainable by hard work and grit but quite simply put all the hard work in the world would never make the average man a Da Vinci or a Micheal Angelo yet one would consider what they did perfect. There needs to be an element of wonder, of how, of why could he, why can’t we? To limit perfection to a standard, is to rob it of essentially what makes it what it is. Perfection is fluid, dynamic, never rigid.  If art alone can show us deviation creates beauty, then maybe it is time to question how we define perfection?
Why don’t we relearn how to define perfection? Often a bone of contention, many think it’s solely achieved through intention yet even in history, it lies too in unintended invention.  The Microwave oven emerged because a chocolate bar melted unexpectedly. Alexander Flemming once left a petri dish out by accident, a mold contaminated it, something considered normally a mistake but this imperfection gave birth to Penicillin. An objective perfection would have robbed us of these inventions. Anesthesia too once only used recreationally as laughing gas came as a result of reckless imperfection. How many more examples do we need to see even a mistake can be perfect? sometimes it’s a matter of timing or simply of outcome.
However, I do not subscribe to black and white thinking so I ask can objective perfection really exist outside the realms of a perfect score? Can objectivity really capture the magic of a perfect song , the perfect melody, can objectivity enable us live in euphoria of the perfect goal, a fond memory of mine would be the 2024 FA Cup final where Manchester United beat Manchester City after quite a difficult season, I remember the Alejandro Garnacho and Kobbie Mainoo goals as perfect not in the essence of technique but because of the emotion it erupted, the reprieve, justification, something to take from a horror season. An objective perfection would erode my definition of perfect but how can one not say my experience too was a perfect one.  There really isn’t a standard for such perception. Thus, can perfection truly ever be wholly objective, in my opinion, its beauty lies in the subjective. I turn to the Japanese concept of Wabi Sabi, there is beauty in that that is imperfect. I draw from this the imperfect too can be perfect simply because it isn’t perfect, quite a beautiful thought really. If so, perfection can never be fixed or set to a standard but perfection is something that’s dynamic in perception, twisting and turning, changing and evolving, Perfection can never truly be the same. Perfection is found in difference. Perfection lies in perception. Perfection one can oddly say lies in imperfection.

BY OKELLO BARTHOLOMEW RYAN.
